Contributor guidelines (#649)
containerbuildsystem/cachi2: CONTRIBUTING.md

  for test. Please refer to other existing package managers to see how they're
  enabled and wired to the CLI.

  Invoke it as `cachi2 fetch-deps --dev-package-managers FOO`

  More explicitly

  * `--dev-package-managers` is a *flag for* `fetch-deps`
  * `FOO` is an *argument to* `fetch-deps` (i.e. the language to fetch for)

### Coding standards

Cachi2's codebase conforms to standards enforced by a collection of formatters, linters and other code checkers:

* [black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) (with a line-length of 100) for consistent formatting
* [isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/) to keep imports sorted
* [flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/) to (de-)lint the code and ~~politely~~ ask for docstrings
* [mypy](https://mypy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) for type-checking. Please include type annotations for new code.
* [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/) to run unit tests and report coverage stats. Please aim for (near) full
  coverage of new code.

Options for all the tools are configured in [pyproject.toml](./pyproject.toml) and [tox.ini](./tox.ini).

Run all the checks that your pull request will be subjected to:

```shell
make test

> ```

Reviewer: Basing on precedents I suggest adding this:

""" Please avoid modifying existing test cases unless fixing a bug that affects testing. If you extend existing feature please add a new test case instead of modifying any existing test cases. (It is fine to add a new parameter group though as long as test function remains unchanged)"""

Author: I see the point you're trying to make here, but I wonder if this'll be taken to an extreme? 

If a feature is changed, then the existing test cases will also change (which a different scenario from extending a feature, but I wonder if the line might get too blurry in some cases). 

And in some cases, even when extending, it might make sense to make small tweaks to an existing test (emphasis on small).

Wdyt? Should we try to rephrase this? Also, where do you think it fits? A small "how to write tests" section?

Reviewer: What's an extreme here? Having separate test cases for separate features does not look like an extreme to me. Tests are code, but a different type of code, not like other code in codebase. They don't have to be non-repetitive, their two main goals are to test an actual scenario and to be easy to comprehend. Tests are not supposed to be read often and are not supposed to be modified unless a feature they are testing is getting redesigned or removed. However when one reads a test they better spend as little time as possible to figure out how a test works and what it tests. I think it is perfectly ok to copy a test implementation over, tweak it for a new use case and have a new test that way. On the other hand extending existing tests with even more functionality makes them confusing and prone to bugs. When a test function accepts a single parameterized argument it is trivial to figure out how the most recent change broke it. It becomes a separate quest when there are many such arguments and when a test function is a sequence of set-ups, intermediate assertions and branching on parameters.

Author: > are not supposed to be modified unless a feature they are testing is getting redesigned or removed

Yeah, that's the point I was missing. The first sentence gives the impression that only bugfixes should change the current tests. I'd even say "changed" instead of "redesigned" ^. If you change how a feature works, then the tests should be updated, otherwise they'll just fail. 

Maybe we can write it as:

"""
When extending an existing feature, please add a new test case instead of modifying any existing ones. Large test scenarios with many branching paths are very hard to understand and to maintain. It is ok to copy and paste large parts of an existing test if needed for a new scenario. Also, it is fine to add a new parameter group, though as long as the test function remains unchanged.
"""

Reviewer: Yes, your suggestion reads better. I would have dropped 'though' from the last sentence, but that's an insignificant nitpick.

Author: Added it as a separate section (I followed this [logic](https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/cachi2/pull/649#discussion_r1769346092))

> 

Reviewer: Another thing worth mentioning:

"""If your code was inspired by any third-party sources please consider adding a comment with a link to these sources. Generally please consider adding comments to the code whenever there exists any context which is
not obvious from the code alone. When writing a comment do not repeat how a piece of code works, do explain why this is needed."""

Author: I don't know where to fit this into. Do you think it's worth adding a small section like "Comment guidelines"?

Reviewer: I'd say it is a part of coding standard so it fits right here.

Reviewer: Also to correct my own suggestion: s/please consider adding/please add/

Author: I moved this to a separate section. My feeling is that it felt out of place in section that is mostly dealing with linters. Since we already had a "error message guidelines" section that felt pretty short, I thought the best solution was to move this piece as a similar section.

Cachi2 follows [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) rules.

Upon release, the [.tekton/release.yaml](.tekton/release.yaml) pipeline tags the corresponding
[Cachi2 image][cachi2-container] with the newly released version tag (after validating that the
tag follows the expected format: `$major.$minor.$patch`, without a `v` prefix).

*You apply a release tag to a specific commit. The [.tekton/push.yaml](.tekton/push.yaml) pipeline
should have built the image for that commit already. This is the "corresponding image" that receives
the new version tag. If the image for the tagged commit does not exist, the release pipeline will fail.*

You can watch the release pipeline in the [OpenShift console][ocp-cachi2-pipelines] in case it fails
(the pipeline is not visible anywhere in GitHub UI). For intermittent failures, retrying should be
possible from the OpenShift UI or by deleting and re-pushing the version tag.

*⚠ The release pipeline runs as soon as you push a tag into the repository. Do not push the new version
tag until you are ready to publish the release. You can use GitHub's ability to auto-create the tag
upon publishment.*

## Release schedule

> Cachi2 has a bi-monthly release schedule. Note that the release might be skipped if there's no significant changes to release.

Author: Not sure if these belong here or in the main README

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/648e716d-88be-4369-b642-3e1fbf15638e)

Thanks, English

Author: In my defense, my brain was almost shutting down when I wrote this. I'll change it to "a release every fortnight", to make it clearer.

Reviewer 3: How about just "This project follows a two week release cycle" instead?

Author: For sure, the fortnight had a heavy /s implied :laughing:

Author: Fixed.

Reviewer 4: I was really looking forward to the influx of Gen-Z contributors thinking we were some kind of Fortnite project :stuck_out_tongue:

  * `--dev-package-managers` is a *flag for* `fetch-deps`
  * `FOO` is an *argument to* `fetch-deps` (i.e. the language to fetch for)

### Coding standards

Cachi2's codebase conforms to standards enforced by a collection of formatters, linters and other code checkers:

* [black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) (with a line-length of 100) for consistent formatting
* [isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/) to keep imports sorted
* [flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/) to (de-)lint the code and ~~politely~~ ask for docstrings
* [mypy](https://mypy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) for type-checking. Please include type annotations for new code.
* [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/) to run unit tests and report coverage stats. Please aim for (near) full
  coverage of new code.

Options for all the tools are configured in [pyproject.toml](./pyproject.toml) and [tox.ini](./tox.ini).

Run all the checks that your pull request will be subjected to:

```shell
make test
```

### Pull request guidelines

Observe the following rules when submitting a pull request for review:

* Write clear and informative commit messages, use the description to provide further context.

> * All commits must be signed-off.

Reviewer 4: Consistency in list markers - we started out with '-' earlier...

* Please provide an informative description on the pull request's summary.
* Split changes in multiple commits, in a way that each commit addresses a clear and concise problem.
* Avoid PRs that are too large, split the work into multiple PRs if necessary.
* Don't add commits to fix issues introduced in the same pull request, amend the already existing commits.
* We don't use merge commits, so always use rebase to keep your branch up-to-date.
* Verify the coding standards by running the configured linters.

> * Each single commit needs to pass the CI.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Ensure that every single commit passes CI — this is mandatory
```

> * You can make use of Github comments to clarify some implementation points.

Reviewer: Maybe we should add
```
-- Consider adding the same comment to the code
```
right after this one? If a developer feels the need to explain certain aspect in a GH comment then there is a good chance that future maintainers will benefit from it too.

* The use of diagrams, sample code and links to specific parts of external documentation is highly encouraged.

### Error message guidelines

We try to keep error messages friendly and actionable.

> * If there is a known solution, the error message should politely suggest the solution.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If there is a known solution, the error message should politely suggest the solution
```

>   * Include a link to the documentation when suitable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - Include a link to the documentation when suitable
```

> * If there is no known solution, suggest where to look for help.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If there is no known solution, suggest where to look for help
```

> * If retrying is a possible solution, suggest retrying and where to look for help if the issue persists.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If retrying is a possible solution, suggest retrying and where to look for help if the issue persists
```

# Contributing to Cachi2

## Table of contents

* [How to start a contribution](#how-to-start-a-contribution)
  * [How we deal with larger features](#how-we-deal-with-larger-features)
  * [Cachi2's ethos](#cachi2s-ethos)
* [Development](#development)
  * [Virtual environment](#virtual-environment)
  * [Developer flags](#developer-flags)
  * [Coding standards](#coding-standards)
  * [Pull request guidelines](#pull-request-guidelines)
  * [Error message guidelines](#error-message-guidelines)
  * [Test guidelines](#test-guidelines)
  * [Comment guidelines](#comment-guidelines)
  * [Running unit tests](#running-unit-tests)
  * [Running integration tests](#running-integration-tests)
  * [Adding new dependencies to the project](#adding-new-dependencies-to-the-project)
* [Releasing](#releasing)

## How to start a contribution

> The team always encourages early communication for all types of contributions. Found a bug or see something that could be improved? Open an issue. Want to address something bigger like adding new PM support or overhauling the entire project? Open an issue or start a Discussion on Github. This way, we can give you guidance and avoid your work being wasted on an implementation which does not fit the project's scope and goal.

Reviewer 5: PM -> package manager

Alternatively, submit a pull request with one of the following

* A high-level design of the feature, highlighting goals and key decision points.
* A proof-of-concept implementation.
* In case the change is trivial, you can start with a draft or even provide a PR with the final implementation.

### How we deal with larger features

> Implementing a larger feature (such as adding a new package manager) is usually a very long and detailed effort. This type of work does not fit well into a single pull request; after several comment threads it becomes almost unmanageable (for you) and very hard to review (for us). For that reason, we request that larger features be split into a series of pull requests. Once approved, these pull requests will be merged into "main", but the new feature will be marked as experimental, and will retain this mark until it meets code quality standards and all necessary changes are merged.

Reviewer 5: Maybe we can point contributors to existing package managers for inspiration or give some initial steps on how to proceed with adding a new package manager. WDYT ?

Author: Do you have a suggestion of what links we should add, or how we should phrase this? Maybe we should add it as a follow-up?

Reviewer: I'd have left it for a future PR. Adding a new PM is a non-trivial task and I think it is reasonable to expect contributors to do some homework before attempting this. And if they both need a new PM and absolutely unsure where to start they could open an issue or a discussion.

Reviewer 5: I mean, it is upon us what _adding a new package manager from external contributors_ should look like.

Reviewer 5: > And if they both need a new PM and absolutely unsure where to start they could open an issue or a discussion.

This sounds like it could be part of the document :)
Why make follow-up PR and switch context again when the conversation happens here and now?

Author: Because this PR is going on for a while, and we probably have a solid starting point. I have already pointed contributors to this PR, so I feel like having it merged will bring a more official meaning to the docs.

This has several implications

* Experimental features are not fully endorsed by the maintainers, and maintainers will not provide support.
* Experimental features are not production-ready and should never be used in production.
* Always expect that an experimental feature can be fully dropped from this project without any prior notice.
* A feature toggle is needed to allow users to opt-in. This is currently being handled by the `dev-package-managers` flag.
* All SBOMs produced when an experimental feature is used will be marked as such.

If, for some reason, you feel this proposed workflow does not fit the feature you're contributing, please reach out to the maintainers so we can provide an alternative.

#### Making experimental features production-ready

> When a feature's development has reached a stable point, you can propose making it an official part of the project. This signals to users that the feature is production-ready. To communicate this intent to the maintainers, open a pull request containing an Architecture Decision Record (ADR) with an outline of the implementation, and a clear statement of all decisions which were made (as well as their rationale).

Reviewer: This is more than just being ready. It also signals that maintainers are confident in the feature and have enough understanding and means to maintain it once implementation is finished. I suggest adding
```
Once maintainers are confident that they have enough information to maintain the new feature as officially supported they will accept it and help with moving out from under experimental flag.```

Author: Done

Reviewer 4: :taco:

To re-generate new data (output, dependencies checksums, vendor checksums) and run integration tests with them:

```shell
make GENERATE_TEST_DATA=true test-integration
```

Generate data for test cases matching a pytest pattern:

```shell
CACHI2_GENERATE_TEST_DATA=true tox -e integration -- -k gomod
```

### Adding new dependencies to the project

Sometimes when working on adding a new feature you may need to add a new dependency to the project.
Usually, one commonly goes about it by adding the dependency to one of the ``requirements`` files
or the more modern and standardized ``pyproject.toml`` file.
In our case, dependencies must always be added to the ``pyproject.toml`` file as the
``requirements`` files are generated by the ``pip-compile`` tool to not only pin versions of all
dependencies but also to resolve and pin transitive dependencies. Since our ``pip-compile``
environment is tied to Python 3.9, we have a Makefile target that runs the tool in a container
image so you don't have to install another Python version locally just because of this. To
re-generate the set of dependencies, run the following in the repository and commit the changes:

```

> $ make pip-compile

Reviewer 5: nitpick: Can we drop `$` so the command is copy-pasteable?

## Table of contents

- [How to start a contribution](#how-to-start-a-contribution)
    - [How we deal with larger features](#how-we-deal-with-larger-features)
- [Contribution guidelines](#contribution-guidelines)
    - [Cachi2's ethos](#cachi2s-ethos)
    - [Coding guidelines](#coding-guidelines)
- [Setting up a development environment](#setting-up-a-development-environment)
- [Release schedule](#release-schedule)

## How to start a contribution

> The team always encourages early communication for all types of contributions. This way, we can give you guidance and avoid that work is wasted on implementation that do not fit the project's scope and goal. Here are some suggested ways on how to do it:

Author: I incorporated your suggestion :+1:

- Write a high-level design of the feature, highlighting goals and key decision points. The use of diagrams, sample code and links to specific parts of external documentation is highly encouraged. This is probably the best approach in case you want to introduce support for a new package manager.

> - Write a proof-of-concept implementation and open a pull request to the Cachi2 repository. Please provide thorough description on the pull request's summary, and also make use of Github comments to clarify some implementation points.

Author: I moved all of these to separate guidelines sections

- In case the change is trivial, you can already provide a PR with the final implementation, or even start with a draft. Remember that a thorough and clear pull request description can really alleviate the process of understading of what's being proposed, so please provide one.

If it's still unclear on how to get started, you can simply reach out to the team by filing an issue in our Github repository.

### How we deal with larger features

> Implementing a new package manager is usually a very long and detailed effort. This type of work does not fit in a single pull request, for the simple reason that it becomes very hard to review and almost unmaneageable after several comment threads. For that reason, we require that larger features are split into a series of pull requests. Once approved, these pull requests will get merged to our main branch, but the feature under development will be marked as experimental. This has several implications:

Author: Changed.

- An experimental feature is not fully endorsed by the maintainers, and no support will be provided by them.

> - Experimental features are not production-ready and should never be used that way.

Author: Fixed

- Always expect that an experimental feature can be fully dropped from this project without any prior notice.
- A feature toggle is needed to allow users to opt-in. This is currently being handled by the `dev-package-managers` flag¹.

> - All SBOMs produced when an experimental feature is used will be marked as so, as a means to provide transparency to users².

Author: Fixed

After this ADR is reviewed and approved, the feature can be taken out of the experimental toggle and will be considered an official part of the project, and stable for production use

¹ This flag is already scoped to be deprecated, so that we can provide individual feature toggle for experimental features.
² This is not implemented yet, but it is already planned.
³ A base model for the ADR will be provided soon.

## Contribution Guidelines

### Cachi2's Ethos
Whenever adding a new feature to Cachi2, it is important to keep these fundamental aspects in mind:

1. Very accurate reporting of the prefetched dependencies

    Cachi2's primary goal is to prefetch content and enable hermetic builds. But hermetic builds are only useful if they end up providing a more accurate SBOM than a non-hermetic build would. Cachi2 strives to download only what's explicitly declared in a project's source code, and accurately report it in the resulting SBOM.

2. Avoid arbitrary code execution

>     Some package manager implementations rely on third-party tools to gather data or even to fetch the dependencies. This brings the risk of arbitrary code execution, which opens the door for random content to be part of the prefetched content. This is undermines the accuracy of the SBOM, and must be avoided at all costs.

Author: Fixed

3. Always perform checksum validation

>     The content provided to the build will only be safe if all the downloaded packages had their checksums verified. In case a mismatch is found, the full request can be failed, since the prefetched content is tainted and is potentially malicious. There are two types of checksums: server-provided and user-provided. Cachi2 prefers the latter, but does not require it. Everytime that a dependency did not have a user-provided checksum verified, the resulting SBOM should state so. All dependencies need at least one checksum to be validated.

Author: Fixed

4. Favor reproducibilty

    Always use fully resolved lockfiles or similar input files to determine what content needs to be download for a specific project (e.g. npm's `package-lock.json`, a `pip-compiled` generated `requirements.txt`, etc). Resolving the dependencies during the prefetch will prevent its behavior from being deterministic, or in other words, the same repository and the same commit hash should always result in identical prefetch results.

### Coding Guidelines
- Write clear and informative commit messages.
- Make use of the description part of the commit message to provide further context.

> - Split changes in multiple commits, in a way that each commit 

Reviewer: ...that each commit addresses a clear and concise problem.

Author: Fixed

> - All commits need to be signed-off.

Author: Fixed
